[[sec:zfinx]]
== "Zfinx", "Zdinx", "Zhinx", "Zhinxmin" Extensions for Floating-Point in Integer Registers, Version 1.0

This chapter defines the "Zfinx" extension (pronounced "z-f-in-x")
that provides instructions similar to those in the standard
floating-point F extension for single-precision floating-point
instructions but which operate on the `x` registers instead of the `f`
registers. This chapter also defines the "Zdinx", "Zhinx", and
"Zhinxmin" extensions that provide similar instructions for other
floating-point precisions.

[NOTE]
====
The F extension uses separate `f` registers for floating-point
computation, to reduce register pressure and simplify the provision of
register-file ports for wide superscalars. However, the additional of
architectural state increases the minimal implementation cost. By
eliminating the `f` registers, the Zfinx extension substantially reduces
the cost of simple RISC-V implementations with floating-point
instruction-set support. Zfinx also reduces context-switch cost.

In general, software that assumes the presence of the F extension is
incompatible with software that assumes the presence of the Zfinx
extension, and vice versa.
====

The Zfinx extension adds all of the instructions that the F extension
adds, _except_ for the transfer instructions FLW, FSW, FMV.W.X, FMV.X.W,
C.FLW[SP], and C.FSW[SP].

[NOTE]
====
Zfinx software uses integer loads and stores to transfer floating-point
values from and to memory. Transfers between registers use either
integer arithmetic or floating-point sign-injection instructions.
====
The Zfinx variants of these F-extension instructions have the same
semantics, except that whenever such an instruction would have accessed
an `f` register, it instead accesses the `x` register with the same
number.

The Zfinx extension depends on the "Zicsr" extension for control and status register access.

=== Processing of Narrower Values

Floating-point operands of width _w_ latexmath:[$<$] XLEN bits occupy
bits _w_-1:0 of an `x` register. Floating-point operations on _w_-bit
operands ignore operand bits XLEN-1: _w_.

Floating-point operations that produce _w_ latexmath:[$<$] XLEN-bit
results fill bits XLEN-1: _w_ with copies of bit _w_-1 (the sign bit).

[NOTE]
====
The NaN-boxing scheme employed in the `f` registers was designed to
efficiently support recoded floating-point formats. Recoding is less
practical for Zfinx, though, since the same registers hold both
floating-point and integer operands. Hence, the need for NaN boxing is
diminished.

Sign-extending 32-bit floating-point numbers when held in RV64 `x`
registers is compatible with the existing RV64 calling conventions, which leave bits 63-32 undefined when passing a 32-bit floating point value in `x` registers. To keep the architecture more regular, we extend this pattern to 16-bit floating-point numbers in both RV32 and RV64.
====
=== Zdinx

The Zdinx extension provides analogous double-precision floating-point
instructions. The Zdinx extension requires the Zfinx extension.

The Zdinx extension adds all of the instructions that the D extension
adds, _except_ for the transfer instructions FLD, FSD, FMV.D.X, FMV.X.D,
C.FLD[SP], and C.FSD[SP].

The Zdinx variants of these D-extension instructions have the same
semantics, except that whenever such an instruction would have accessed
an `f` register, it instead accesses the `x` register with the same
number.

=== Processing of Wider Values

Double-precision operands in RV32Zdinx are held in aligned `x`-register
pairs, i.e., register numbers must be even. Use of misaligned
(odd-numbered) registers for double-width floating-point operands is
_reserved_.

Regardless of endianness, the lower-numbered register holds the
low-order bits, and the higher-numbered register holds the high-order
bits: e.g., bits 31:0 of a double-precision operand in RV32Zdinx might
be held in register `x14`, with bits 63:32 of that operand held in
`x15`.

When a double-width floating-point result is written to `x0`, the entire
write takes no effect: e.g., for RV32Zdinx, writing a double-precision
result to `x0` does not cause `x1` to be written.

When `x0` is used as a double-width floating-point operand, the entire
operand is zeroâ€”i.e., `x1` is not accessed.

[NOTE]
====
Load-pair and store-pair instructions are not provided, so transferring
double-precision operands in RV32Zdinx from or to memory requires two
loads or stores. Register moves need only a single FSGNJ.D instruction,
however.
====
=== Zhinx

The Zhinx extension provides analogous half-precision floating-point
instructions. The Zhinx extension requires the Zfinx extension.

The Zhinx extension adds all of the instructions that the Zfh extension
adds, _except_ for the transfer instructions FLH, FSH, FMV.H.X, and
FMV.X.H.

The Zhinx variants of these Zfh-extension instructions have the same
semantics, except that whenever such an instruction would have accessed
an `f` register, it instead accesses the `x` register with the same
number.

=== Zhinxmin

The Zhinxmin extension provides minimal support for 16-bit
half-precision floating-point instructions that operate on the `x`
registers. The Zhinxmin extension requires the Zfinx extension.

The Zhinxmin extension includes the following instructions from the
Zhinx extension: FCVT.S.H and FCVT.H.S. If the Zdinx extension is
present, the FCVT.D.H and FCVT.H.D instructions are also included.
[NOTE]
====
In the future, an RV64Zqinx quad-precision extension could be defined
analogously to RV32Zdinx. An RV32Zqinx extension could also be defined
but would require quad-register groups.
====
=== Privileged Architecture Implications

In the standard privileged architecture defined in Volume II, the
`mstatus` field FS is hardwired to 0 if the Zfinx extension is
implemented, and FS no longer affects the trapping behavior of
floating-point instructions or `fcsr` accesses.

The `misa` bits F, D, and Q are hardwired to 0 when the Zfinx extension
is implemented.
[NOTE]
====
A future discoverability mechanism might be used to probe the existence
of the Zfinx, Zhinx, and Zdinx extensions.
====
